NO-JIRA: improve OpenStack documentation (#5066)
openshift/hypershift: docs/content/how-to/openstack/create-openstack-cluster.md

# Create an OpenStack cluster

This document explains how to create HostedClusters and Nodepools using the OpenStack platform.

## Overview

When you create a HostedCluster with the OpenStack platform, HyperShift will install the [OpenStack CAPI
provider](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-openstack) in the Hosted Control Plane (HCP) namespace.
Upon scaling up a NodePool, a Machine will be created, and the CAPI provider will create the necessary resources in OpenStack.

## Limitations

* Although the HyperShift Operator with OpenStack support is currently in development and is not intended for production use,
  it is possible to create and manage clusters for development and testing purposes and it's expected to work as described in this document.

> * OpenStack CSI (Cinder and Manila) are not functional yet but is [planned](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSASINFRA-3536) to work in the 4.18 release and be supported in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* OpenStack CSI (Cinder and Manila) are not functional yet but are [expected](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSASINFRA-3536) to work in the 4.18 release and fully supported in future releases.
```

* A few operators running in the workload cluster (e.g. console) won't be operational on day 1 because the floating IP used
  for Ingress isn't automatically configured in the DNS. This is a manual and documented step that needs to be done after the
  cluster is created. We are [working](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSASINFRA-3489) on allowing customers to pre-create the DNS records before the cluster is created by using
  a pre-created floating IP.

## Prerequisites

> * Admin access to an OpenShift cluster (version 4.17+) specified by the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable.

Reviewer: Is the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable really required? Is is `hcp` or `hypershift` that requires it?

For `kubectl` (and thus `oc`), setting the `KUBECONFIG` env var [is _one way_ to overwrite the default path](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/) and is not a requirement.

Author: Having KUBECONFIG loaded is required, `hcp` command doesn't have a CLI argument to select the kubeconfig file, I believe.

Reviewer: And can it load a kubeconfig file from default locations?

Author: I don't think so, I checked the CLI options and couldn't find it.

  This cluster is referred to as the Management OCP cluster.
* The Management OCP cluster must be configured with OVNKubernetes as the default pod network CNI.
* The OpenShift CLI (`oc`) or Kubernetes CLI (`kubectl`) must be installed.
* A valid [pull secret](https://console.redhat.com/openshift/install/platform-agnostic/user-provisioned) file for the `quay.io/openshift-release-dev` repository.

> * OpenStack Octavia service must be running if Ingress is configured with an Octavia load balancer. In the future, we'll

Reviewer: As we potentially have 2 different OpenStack clouds (in case the management cluster runs on OpenStack), should we clarify that Octavia is a requirement for the cloud hosting the guest cluster?

> * OpenStack Octavia service must be running if Ingress is configured with an Octavia load balancer. In the future, we'll

Reviewer: Another requirement:
* The default external network (on which the kube-apiserver LoadBalancer type service is created) of the management cluster must be reachable from the guest cluster.

  explore other Ingress options like MetalLB.

> * Before creating a guest cluster, the `hcp` CLI, `hypershift` CLI, and HyperShift Operator must be installed.

Reviewer: I suggest moving the `hcp` and `hypershift` requirements just below the `oc` and `kubectl` one, and have a separate bullet point for the HyperShift Operator explaining that is must be installed in the management cluster.

  it is possible to create and manage clusters for development and testing purposes and it's expected to work as described in this document.
* OpenStack CSI (Cinder and Manila) are not functional yet but are [expected](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSASINFRA-3536) to work in the 4.18 release and fully supported in future releases.
* A few operators running in the workload cluster (e.g. console) won't be operational on day 1 because the floating IP used
  for Ingress isn't automatically configured in the DNS. This is a manual and documented step that needs to be done after the
  cluster is created. We are [working](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSASINFRA-3489) on allowing customers to pre-create the DNS records before the cluster is created by using
  a pre-created floating IP.

## Prerequisites

* Admin access to an OpenShift cluster (version 4.17+) specified by the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable.
  This cluster is referred to as the Management OCP cluster.
* The Management OCP cluster must be configured with OVNKubernetes as the default pod network CNI.
* The OpenShift CLI (`oc`) or Kubernetes CLI (`kubectl`) must be installed.

> * The `hcp` CLI CLI must be installed.

Reviewer: I'm confused... we've removed the `hypershift` binary as a requirement, but below we're still explaining how to install it, and using it to install the hypershift operator.

Is there an other way we can install the hypershift operator that does not involve the `hypershift` binary?

Author: Oops indeed. I'll fix it today.

Author: Done: https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/pull/5103

> * The `hcp` CLI, `hypershift` CLI must be installed.

Reviewer 2: I would not mention the hypershift CLI and opt for the `hcp` flavor.

!!! note

    Hypershift on OpenStack is possible behind a feature gate, which is why we have

>     to install the operator with `--tech-preview-no-upgrade`. Once the platoform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    to install the operator with `--tech-preview-no-upgrade`. Once the platform
```

# Optional flags:

> # External network to use for the API and Ingress endpoints.

Reviewer: Doesn't API run in the management cluster? The external network just for the Ingress endpoint as I understand it.

export FLAVOR="m1.large"

# Optional flags:
# External network to use for the Ingress endpoint.
export EXTERNAL_NETWORK_ID="5387f86a-a10e-47fe-91c6-41ac131f9f30"

# CA certificate path to use for the OpenStack API if using self-signed certificates.

> # In 4.18, this is not required as the CA cert found in clouds.yaml will be used.

Author: good idea, let me do it now

> # In 4.18, this is not required as the CA cert found in clouds.yaml will be used.

Author: note that this is now optional; but I can add it for the example.

export CA_CERT_PATH="$HOME/ca.crt"

# SSH Key for the nodepool VMs
export SSH_KEY="$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub"

hcp create cluster openstack \
--name $CLUSTER_NAME \
--base-domain $BASE_DOMAIN \
--node-pool-replicas $WORKER_COUNT \
--pull-secret $PULL_SECRET \
--ssh-key $SSH_KEY \
--openstack-ca-cert-file $CA_CERT_PATH \
--openstack-external-network-id $EXTERNAL_NETWORK_ID \
--openstack-node-image-name $IMAGE_NAME \
--openstack-node-flavor $FLAVOR
```

!!! note

    A default NodePool will be created for the cluster with 2 VM worker replicas
    per the `--node-pool-replicas` flag.

!!! note

    When using `hcp` CLI, High Availability will be enabled by default.
    Pods will be scheduled across different nodes to ensure that the control plane is highly available.
    When the management cluster worker nodes are spread across different availability zones,
    the hosted control plane will be spread across different availability zones as well in
    `PreferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` mode for `PodAntiAffinity`.

>     If your management cluster doesn't have enough workers (less than 3), you'll need to

Reviewer 2: Is this something that is going to be supported? Less than 3 workers on the mgmt cluster?

Author: not really but we're dev preview now so better document it for our testers.

## Ingress and DNS

As mentioned in the Limitations section, the Ingress and DNS configuration is a manual step that needs to be done after the cluster is created.
This will be automated in the future.

Once the workload cluster is deploying, the Ingress controller will be installed
and a router named `router-default` will be created in the `openshift-ingress` namespace.

You'll need to update your DNS with the external IP of that router so Ingress (and dependent operators like console) can work.

Once the HostedCluster is created, you need to wait for the `router-default` service to get an external IP.
You can check the status of the `router-default` service by running the following command:

```shell

> watch oc --kubeconfig $CLUSTER_NAME-kubeconfig -n openshift-ingress get service/router-default

Reviewer: Rather than using the external command `watch`, I suggest we use the `-w` flag to watch for changes.

```

> Once the `router-default` service exists, we need to wait for the `status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip` field to be populated which can take a few minutes while the Octavia load balancer is being provisioned.

Reviewer: Isn't that redundant with `you need to wait for the `router-default` service to get an external IP` above?

```shell
watch oc --kubeconfig $CLUSTER_NAME-kubeconfig -n openshift-ingress get service/router-default -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}'
```

When the external IP exists, you can now create a DNS A record for `*.apps.<cluster-name>.<base-domain>` that matches the returned IP address.

> Once this is done, the Ingress operator will become healthy and the console will be accessible shortly after.

Reviewer: In my case it took a long time to converge (presumably due to DNS propagation time?), so YMMV.

> At this point, you should be able to access the OpenShift console by navigating to `https://console-openshift-console.apps.<cluster-name>.<base-domain>` in your browser.

Reviewer: Perhaps explain how to get the kubeadmin credentials to connect to the console?

Author: will do

Once the workload cluster is deploying, the Ingress controller will be installed
and a router named `router-default` will be created in the `openshift-ingress` namespace.

You'll need to update your DNS with the external IP of that router so Ingress (and dependent operators like console) can work.

Once the HostedCluster is created, you need to wait for the `router-default` service to get an external IP:

```shell
oc -w --kubeconfig $CLUSTER_NAME-kubeconfig -n openshift-ingress get service/router-default -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}'
```

When the external IP exists, you can now create a DNS A record for `*.apps.<cluster-name>.<base-domain>` that matches the returned IP address.
Once this is done, the Ingress operator will become healthy and the console will be accessible shortly after.

!!! note

    The DNS propagation time can vary so you might need to wait a few minutes before your HostedCluster becomes healthy.

At this point, you should be able to access the OpenShift console by navigating to `https://console-openshift-console.apps.<cluster-name>.<base-domain>` in your browser.

To get the `kubeadmin` password, you can run this command:
```shell

> oc get --namespace clusters Secret/example-kubeadmin-password -o jsonpath='{.data.password}' | base64 --decode

Reviewer: It wasn't immediately obvious to me that `example` in the above command referred to the cluster name. 

```suggestion
oc get --namespace clusters Secret/${CLUSTER_NAME}-kubeadmin-password -o jsonpath='{.data.password|base64decode}'
```

This also uses the base
